Okay, Mr. Rogers, what was your job at the Austin
American Statement? Well, I had a lot of jobs over a
period of time. I was there from 1952 until 1968.
The last job that I had was managing editor, and in
previous to that I had been an assistant city
editor, I had been a copy editor, I had been a
reporter, but most of my time was spent either as as
an assistant city editor or as management editor.
Could you describe Austin in the 1960s as far as the
race situation and the general attitude? Well, I
think Austin was
caught up in the changes that were going on like
other places and in some ways it was a a site of
ferment. And there are a couple of reasons for
that. One is that the Austin leadership and I think
Austin attitudes traditionally were really
rather on the conservative side. And but there was
at the same time a very strong liberal element in
the community, mostly associated with the
University of Texas and especially with the
University of Texas students. Of course, there
are also faculty there.
But I think there also was a determination on the
part of the city's political leadership to see to
it that the law was carried out in the best way
possible. So while certainly there were tensions
in the town, as far as the integration of lunch
counters and restrooms and public facilities
like hotels and theaters and things like that.
There also was a strong force in the town acting on
behalf of integration. And the political
leadership saw to it that the police department
whatever their own personal biases might be,
behaved in a fashion to protect the rights of
people who were sitting in at lunch counters or
conducting marches or things like that. And so
actually, I think there was a minimum of trouble, a
lot less than there could have been and a lot less
than there were in other places. What was the
attitude of the public towards the media? Well, I
think that Just in a general way, I think that the
American Statesman and the television station
suffered
the same fate that most local media do. You know,
most people don't really like their own, or say
they don't like their own hometown newspapers,
their own hometown TV. The assumption is that
somewhere else people are all doing a better job.
There are a good many people who
had negative feelings toward the newspaper
because we didn't do this or we didn't do that but
but in that regard i don't think there was anything
special about that i think that was just the
generalized kind of an attitude that
particularly monopoly media suffer in any town
and i don't think it's changed all that much i think
it still goes on it's really tough to be honored in
your own town if you're in the news business when
did you notice Important changes come in the 60s as
far as race.
Oh, I have no way in the world of... pinpointing
that on our memory for dates and all that kind of
thing. But of course, Austin was pretty
consistent with all of the things that were going
on elsewhere in the country. And particularly
after, especially after Kennedy's
assassination in 1963, things moved very fast.
They moved very fast in Austin than they did
everywhere else. And in some ways, I suppose,
Austin
felt particularly close to these changes in the
sense that Lyndon Johnson, who was essentially a
local man, was the prime mover behind the great
Russian civil rights legislation that took place
after the Kennedy assassination. And so I think
civil rights was a matter that was much on the local
minds and Mr. Johnson, of course, flew into Austin
when he came to the White House on 3rd and Alice. So I
think there was an acute awareness of everything
that was going on. Certainly, we can mark lots of
social change in this country from the Kennedy
assassination. It had been beginning before
that, but that gave it that great impetus. And then
the events that followed that, which was suddenly
the assassination of Robert Kennedy and Martin
Luther King and everything, and the whole
business, and the March on Washington and all
that. It was just, Austin was caught up in it like
the whole nation.
Well, how was student unrest at
the University of Texas? Well, I can't... Boy,
that seems like 10 million years ago somehow.
There was student unrest, but I don't recall that
it took any particularly insidious forms. There
were... There were students who joined in
demonstrations about everything that came
along, but I don't recall that we had any really
serious confrontations of any kind. And there
were times when there were rather volatile
speakers like Rap Brown and others who came, and
they came in and got out with minor. I think the most
obvious thing about the students at the
University of Texas at that time was their
apparent difference from the rest of the
population. The alternative lifestyle business
was starting. Everybody was trying to see how
scroungy you could look, and there was long hair,
and open smoking a pot, and all those kinds of
things that so outraged the established
established them in those days and of course the
University of Texas was the center of that and some
really you know you would hardly even pay any
attention to them now but at that time it was like
watching a freak show out on Guadalupe when you
walked by the University because you know we've
not seen this kind of thing before and so I think
maybe that was the most obvious thing that was
going on. Well on this students How, was there any
newspaper bias towards them? One way or the other?
One way or the other.
I really can't, I can't recall that there was. We
had a,
I'm sure that in some of the ways that we handled
some stories in the beginning, that we probably
were careless about the use of the word like hippie
and things like that. But I don't think there was
any deliberate attempt on the part of the
newspaper either to put these people down or to
unduly support whatever their attitudes might be
and whatnot.
Lord knows my memory may be faulty, I can't recall
that there was any particular difficulty one way
or the other. It seems to me that we treated that
like any other news phenomenon that was going on.
And unconsciously, we probably wrote in ways that
were derogatory and whatnot, although I don't
think it was a deliberate kind of thing. I think
it's kind of like the unconscious sexism that we
still fall into just because we don't even think
about it.
Was there any rioting in Austin? No, not rioting in
the sense that it happened anywhere else. We
didn't, you know, the town was never set on fire or
the streets weren't blocked or anything like
that. Partly it was,
largely I think it was because the police by and
large did not make bad mistakes in handling these
things. For example, when there were
demonstrations, parades, and things like that,
the police chief kept his riot squads out of sight.
He didn't do the kinds of things that might have
provoked things. And they were pretty careful
about being sure that people who were heckling the
paraders and that sort of thing or were trying to
cause trouble when blacks were sitting in at the
lunch counter. That seems impossible, I guess.
Only a few years ago. you know, they saw to it that
people were able to exercise their rights to
parade and to demonstrate and sit in if they wanted
to and all that sort of thing. So I think it was
managed pretty well, and there certainly was
nothing that I recall that even approached a riot.
Certainly nothing like the kinds of things that
went on in Detroit and places like that. Well, how
many demonstrations and sit-ins were there? Good
grief. I have no idea. You know, it was just The most
obvious thing in terms of sit-ins that I remember
was that for a series of weekends, the NCAA or
whoever they were were regularly conducting
sit-ins
at lunch counters like at Woolworth's. in
downtown down on the course at that time with the
six in Congress. And there were, of course, people
who showed up to jeer and all that kind of thing, but
the police kept it under control. And so, by and
large, I think it happened with a minimum of
difficulty considering the total difficulty
that was going on in the country at the time. And how
many demonstrations were there? Gosh, I don't
know. It seemed like somebody was always showing
up on the steps of the Capitol or having a parade
down Congress Avenue or something. But I suppose
that one of the reasons my memory is sort of dim
about these things is because they were almost
routine and they weren't just really not that
upsetting. They were just routine. In the
newsroom, what kind of coverage? We covered them.
We always covered those things. We always had
reporters out. But we were there more like you
conduct a death watch when a famous person was
getting ready to die. We were there in case
anything happened, you know, as much as anything
else. And we reported on them, and we ran
photographs, and we reported such incidents as
there were and whatnot, but, you know, we just
handled them like any other news story that was
going on. We neither... We neither... fomented
them
or made a big deal out of them.
About the rise of the counterculture or the hippie
and the race riots, how much was it discussed among
journalists
in the newsroom?
Hmm.
I suppose that it was discussed in the same terms
that we discussed any other kind of news that was
going on. I don't think that we... I don't recall
people sitting around and philosophizing and
saying, gosh, I was down on the street today and I
believe the counterculture is rising. You know,
this, after all, was an evolutionary kind of a
thing. It happened rapidly, but still and all,
it's not the kind of thing that... And of course,
our people were aware of what was going on. And
partly, it depended on what kind of a beat you were
covering. I'm sure that the business writers had
one view of the thing, and the police writers had
another view of the thing, and so on. But I think, by
and large, as far as our newsroom is concerned,
that
there was a considerable amount of tolerance for
the kind of change that was going on, certainly
among the working news people. We
were observers of the scene day by day, and I
suppose because we were, in a sense, we may have
been less
inclined
to comment on it than maybe some other people. I
mean, as I recall now that's far away from it,
whatever it was we said about it or thought about it
was pretty generally in terms of coverage we were
giving to it. You know, just another day at the
office for us, I
think.
As far as the editorial policies and such that when
there was no bias one way or the other. That's a very
difficult thing to recall.
I'm have no doubt, though I don't actually have a
memory of it that we may have had editorial from
time to time suggested that the street people were
clogging up things and ought to be controlled a
little bit better out around the university and we
may have had some funny things objecting to the way
they dressed and we may have had some
anti-narcotics editorials and things like that
but as far as saying that you know taking any kind of
a staunchly anti-counterculture stand and
abhorring the state of it well we didn't do that and
we certainly were editorially convinced that
racial integration was the right thing.
Wherever bias occurred in coverage and so on was
unconscious personal bias and certainly was not
an institutional bias.
At this time, also, Vietnam was going on. What kind
of coverage was given to Vietnam, say, before
1964? Well, Vietnam coverage was we didn't have
anybody in Vietnam from our own staff or from our
own organization. So what our coverage was the
coverage that the Associated Press and the United
Press International were giving to the war. And we
pretty regularly gave it a prominent position
quite often was a lead story, but that's true of any
war, because copy editors, by and large, are lazy,
and the war is always a safe thing to put on top. And
so our coverage reflected what was reflected in
the coverage generally. In the beginning, we
covered it the way we had covered wars in the past.
We pretty much accepted that in terms of the
coverage that we were getting, It was us and them,
and there was to be a winning side and a losing side,
and we wanted to win. The traditional view, we'd
had a war, and our view and our coverage began to
change as the nation's view and coverage began to
change. When it became apparent that the
commanders in the field were lying about almost
everything they could think of, and that
Politically, it was a hopeless mire that nobody
really understood what the war was about, that
there was a great deal of unnecessary cruelty
among the sides, and then the meat line business
and all that kind of thing. So there was nothing
really different in terms of our approaches or our
attitudes or our coverage, I think, than there was
generally nationally. But in fact, we had very
little control over that because we were merely
really using what was coming to us from the war and
whatnot. And we had the same kind of arguments
among people in our staff that the people in the
United States generally were having about
whether we ought to stay or whether we ought to get
out or whether we ought to bomb the gooks or, you
know, the kind of thing that went on. And there were
some who, of course, felt that the war was immoral.
There were people who personally sympathized
with the young men who were fleeing Canada and all
that kind of thing. There were others who felt the
opposite. As far as the coverage was concerned, we
were virtually, we were really captives of the
wire services because we certainly didn't have
any resources there. There have been some studies
done of newspapers in Texas, and they found that
stories about American losses in Vietnam, at
least in the earlier days, were played down and
given a less prominent position than they were in,
say, New York or the Washington Post. Could be. I'm
really not familiar with the studies. And if
our newspaper reflected that, It was totally
accidental, and it was based simply on the choices
of whoever happened to be working on those things.
I can assure you that there was no institutional
policy which said, we're going to downplay our
losses and upplay their losses. Such a
conversation simply never took place. Nobody
ever thought about it. The judgments that were
made in terms of the play on the stories were simply
the judgments of whoever happened to be in the
slot. It's that simple. Whether it turned out that
statistically you could establish that kind of
bias or not, I have no idea. But if so, it was a mere
happenstance. When the war started becoming
unpopular, how much of a stance did the newspaper
take editorially? I have no memory of it. I'm
sorry. I simply do not recall. back in the 1960s
when things were changing were journalists
attitudes change yeah i think journalists
attitudes began to change i think that by and large
among working journalists there was a greater
tolerance for change i think there was a greater
empathy with the counterculture people i think
there was a greater sense of of the wrongness of the
Vietnam War. And I think, in general, probably,
the journalists I knew, at least, tended to be more
what Lucille categorized as liberal in their
attitudes, I suppose. And I think, by and large, in
their own personal attitudes, they were out a
little bit ahead, maybe, of the public at large on
those things. Having said that, I haven't said
anything very startling. I think that's true
almost universally. I don't think that those
newsroom attitudes, however, necessarily have
any great impact on the content or the play of news,
because I think this is countervailed by the fact
publishers, by and large, tend to have an opposite
political and philosophical and social
orientation. So I think, you know, a few things
kind of play against each other, and you wind up
with a kind of a neutrality, I think, as far as play
and everything.
It's hard for people on the outside to cope with,
but,
you know, I'd be The President's personal
attitudes as reporters are under a little bit
better control, I think, than a lot of the public
likes to believe. In fact, you are able to set those
things aside and keep overt bias. You cannot keep
unconscious bias out, no question about that. But
I think you do keep overt bias out on things like
that.
So I think what I remember from the 60s was a
difference that is a kind of a consistent
difference between news people and perhaps a
larger public turns their own personal
attitudes.
Back to the demonstrations for a minute. Were
there any instances where there was threat of a
demonstration and your newspaper was concerned
about the way they play the story and the effect
that the coverage would give well the most obvious
example that i recall was a situation in which at
some time i don't remember the exact date or
whatnot that a rumor began to circulate around
among people like bankers and other business
leaders in town that there was a great invasion of
blacks coming into oscar and that somehow that
they were coming in from outside and they were
getting ready to have this gigantic thing and that
Austin now was going to be put into peril. And there
were among that group people who wanted us to
publish warnings to the public about this thing.
Well, we were really loathe to do that kind of thing
because What you're dealing with there is just
applying a spark to the tinderbox. And so we wanted
to be mighty sure before we did anything at all, and
we were not about to publish warnings to people
that the blacks are coming for crying out loud. And
so we did mount an investigation, and we
discovered that indeed there was an unusually
large number of out-of-town black people in
Austin. But we also discovered that they were all
Baptists, and they were coming for a camp meeting
that weekend. And so what we did was nothing. And we
did nothing because to have done anything, even to
have denied the river, very likely would have
inflamed a situation that actually didn't exist,
which we very easily could have created in
cooperation with these rumors that were going
around among responsible citizens of the town and
so that's an instance in which we made a deliberate
editorial judgment not to do something in order to
avoid blowing the lid off
so i don't know if that answers your question or not
but that's certainly one illustration and also i
think that illustrates the way in which we
approached all those things. We had an acute
sense, I think, during all that period of our
responsibility
not to be the catalyst that tore the town apart and
whatnot. And we certainly tried. We didn't want to
be in the business quote, news management. We
didn't want to be in the business of providing
cover-ups, but we also didn't want to be in the
business of spreading the gas.